# Essence of Flexibility

Based on the extensive research of Joshua Naterman. 
But summarised as an ultra-simplified guide to become flexible.
The practical part includes some terminology learned from Emmet Louis.

* Why being inflexible? 
  Flexibility is primarily controlled by our nervous system.
  Our central nervous system (CNS) reacts (via reflexes) to signals from sensory nerves and thus hinders us from accessing or using new, unexplored and unused ranges of motion. We developed restricted motion patterns because of our restricted exploration of said ranges in the past, constituting the current "map of movement" in our motor and premotor cortex, which destines how flexible we are. 

* Why get children flexible faster?
  Children become flexible fast not because of musculoskeletal reasons, but because they have much less self-inflicted restriction carved into their map of movement. They can easily gain access to new ranges by exploration and if there is restriction, there is less to reprogramm. Metaphorically speaking, the childs map has to be expanded, while our map has to be overwritten. 

* How to become flexible in theory?
  Relaxing into the end ranges of motion with sufficient effort (by means like stretching with different techniques) can change those sensory reactions and temporarily increase our current limit of flexibility, which gives us access to new ranges of motion until the limit resets. To set our limit permanently higher or in other words, to 'stabilise' the temporary accessibility or to have access to the new ranges of motion at all times ("unlock" them), we have to actively explore the new range to slowly reprogramm our map of movement.
  [Described by Joshua as to "alter the neural circuits at the level of the motor and premotor cortex" by motor learning.]
  
* So what to do?
  We have to stretch intelligently to gain access to new ranges of motion. And right after doing so, we have to actively explore and use the very same ranges of motion to develop confidence, strength and control where we are insecure, weak and unnecessarily tense. We have to do this in a progressive way, by constantly repeating to unlock new temporary flexibility limits to explore and use them in practice afterwards in complex movement by entering and exiting those ranges repetitively by simple entries, strength training, kicks, dance or other practices utilising the new range. This motor learning in new, unexplored territory is essential to develop permanent flexibility.
  
* How often to do that and how intense?
  Depending on how hard or gentle we stretch and how sore we get, we can do this everyday, every other day or just three times a week. Very sensible practitioners who really know how not to hurt themselves inspite of it, can do it through soreness. Really advanced practitioners though won't develop soreness in the first place. Soreness is not needed nor necessarily desired, unless following a very specific and advanced protocol dealing with it.  

* How intense to stretch? 
  The load for gravity assisted stretches should be as little as possible and as much as necessary, because the goal is to enter the position without the assistance of external weight (like in a splits). Constantly increasing weight to stretched positions is not necessary for flexibility development. It is primarily reasonable to use as a means to develop the strength for skills like side split pulls to standing - after the splits itself is unlocked. 
  The stretching should be as gentle as possible and as hard as needed to improve the range in a given session without a risk of injury. While "hard" refers to the intensity of the muscular activation in the stretch (agonist and antagonist), never to stupidly "pushing down". 


PRACTICE

1. Phase: 10-20 minutes of stretching to the end range of a given day.
 
2. Phase: 2-6 sets of 10-20 reps entering and exiting this newly gained range.
With an emphasis on moving around in the range, exploring it, access it from different positions into different positions etc. In this phase, do as if the range that you couldn't access before the stretching is as normal to you as possible and as if you can access it anytime. Do it and feel it. Soon it will become true and stay with you. 

